PD-1055 / 25.04 / Pd 1055 add fast deduplication content (#3438)
truenas/documentation: content/References/ZFSDeduplication.md

Copy the data within a file system or to a different file system, or replicate it using the Web UI replication functions. 
Data in snapshots is fixed and can only be changed by replicating the snapshot to a different pool with different settings (which preserves its snapshot status) or copying its contents.

It is possible to stipulate deduplicating only specified datasets and volumes in a pool. 
The DDT encompasses the entire poo, but only data in these locations is deduplicated when written. 
Other data not well deduplicated or where deduplication is not appropriate, is not deduplicated when written, saving resources.

## Fast Deduplication on ZFS
Fast deduplication is a feature included in OpenZFS 2.3.0, that makes backend changes to legacy deduplication in ZFS that improves performance and can improve latency in some use cases.
These improvements speed up I/O processes, look-ups, and reclaim storage space, and in situations where pools are handling reasonable workloads, improve latency over legacy dedup.

> Fast deduplication accomplishes these improvements through three new functions: prefetch, pruning, and a quota that limits writes to the deduplication tables (DDTs) that fall outside the specified quota range.

Author: addressed in the next commit.

> Fast deduplication accomplishes these improvements through three new functions: prefetch, pruning, and a quota that limits writes to the deduplication tables (DDTs) that fall outside the specified quota range.

Reviewer: It seems part of my test got lost, breaking the whole sentence.

> Fast deduplication accomplishes these improvements through three new functions: prefetch, pruning, and a quota that limits writes to the deduplication tables (DDTs) that fall outside the specified quota range.

Reviewer: Also there seem to be missing some connection between the old and new sentence.  Old one should probably mention DDT Log among new functions.

> Fast deduplication accomplishes these improvements through three new functions: prefetch, pruning, and a quota that limits writes to the deduplication tables (DDTs) that fall outside the specified quota range.

Author: I did miss that part... copy/paste to the resuce.

Prefetch fills the ARC cache by loading deduplication tables into it.
Loading the DDT into memory speeds up operations by reducing on-demand disk reads for every record the system processes.
The prefetch is particularly important in systems with large deduplication tables (DDTs) where the process of loading the table on demand can take days after an import/reboot.

> The cache of the DDT might also reload portions of a DDT flushed due to inactivity.

Author: in the next commit.

---
title: "ZFS Deduplication"
description: "Provides general information on ZFS deduplication in TrueNAS, hardware recommendations, and useful deduplication CLI commands."
weight: 60
tags:
- zfs
- storage
---

ZFS supports deduplication as a feature. Deduplication means that identical data is only stored once, which can significantly reduce storage size. 
However, deduplication is a compromise and balance between many factors, including cost, speed, and resource needs. 
Consider and understand the implications of using deduplication before adding it to a pool.

## Deduplication on ZFS

> Deduplication is one technique ZFS can use to store file and other data in a pool. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Deduplication is one technique ZFS can use to store files and other data in a pool. 
```

Only when no file uses the data is the data deleted. 
ZFS keeps a reference table that links files and pool data to the actual storage blocks containing their data. This is the deduplication table (DDT).

The DDT is a fundamental ZFS structure and is part of the metadata or the pool. 
If a pool (or any dataset in the pool) has ever contained deduplicated data, the pool contains a DDT, and that DDT is as fundamental to the pool data as any of its other file system tables. 
Like any other metadata, DDT contents might be temporarily held in the ARC (RAM/memory cache) or [L2ARC]({{< relref "/references/L2ARC.md" >}}) (disk cache) for speed and repeated use, but the DDT is not a disk cache. 
It is a fundamental part of the ZFS pool structure and how ZFS organizes pool data on its disks. 
Therefore, like any other pool data, if DDT data is lost, the pool is likely to become unreadable. DDT is not needed for reads, but any writes or deletions of deduplicated blocks. So, it is important to store on redundant devices. 

A pool can contain any coexisting mix of deduplicated data and non-deduplicated data. 
If deduplication is enabled at the time of writing, the DDT is used to write data.

> It writes non-deduplicated if deduplication is not enabled at the time of writing. Subsequently, the data remains as at the time it was written until it is deleted.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It writes non-deduplicated data if deduplication is not enabled at the time of writing. Subsequently, the data remains as at the time it was written until it is deleted.  
```

> It writes non-deduplicated if deduplication is not enabled at the time of writing. Subsequently, the data remains as at the time it was written until it is deleted.  

Reviewer 2: "the data remains as at the time it was was written" is a little confusing to me. Maybe "the data remains the same as it was at the time it was written"?

> The only way to convert existing current data to all deduplicated or not deduplicated or to change how it is deduplicated is to create a new copy while new settings are active.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The only way to convert existing current data to all deduplicated or non-deduplicated or to change how it is deduplicated is to create a new copy while new settings are active.  
```

Copy the data within a file system or to a different file system, or replicate it using the Web UI replication functions. 
Data in snapshots is fixed and can only be changed by replicating the snapshot to a different pool with different settings (which preserves its snapshot status) or copying its contents.

It is possible to stipulate deduplicating only specified datasets and volumes in a pool. 
The DDT encompasses the entire pool, but only data in these locations is deduplicated when written. 
Other data not well deduplicated or where deduplication is not appropriate, is not deduplicated when written, saving resources.

## Fast Deduplication on ZFS
Fast deduplication is a feature included in OpenZFS 2.3.0.
It makes backend changes to legacy deduplication in ZFS that improve performance and can reduce latency in some use cases.
These improvements speed up I/O processes, look-ups, and reclaim storage space, and in situations where pools are handling reasonable workloads, improve latency over legacy dedup.
Fast deduplication accomplishes these improvements through four new functions: DDT log, prefetch, pruning, and a quota. 

### DDT Log

> Instead of writing DDT entries in random order as they arrive, which causes excessive write inflation, and since single DDT record writes might require a whole ZAP leaf block, fast dedup temporarily writes them into a log, flushing it into actual DDT ZAP only after sorting.

Reviewer 2: Do we need to define ZAP?

Author: I thought I had. I wonder if that was removed with the text Alex recommended be removed. I shall check.

Improving write locality allows aggregating multiple DDT entry writes into one ZAP leaf write.

### Prefetch
Prefetch fills the ARC cache by loading deduplication tables into it.

> Loading the DDT into memory speeds up operations by reducing on-demand disk reads for every record the system processes.

Reviewer 2: I see where we're defining DDT and DDTs in nearly every section--is this necessary? Or could we just define it for the first use and cut down on some words?

Author: No you just have to define it once in the article. :-)

The prefetch is particularly important in systems with large deduplication tables (DDTs) where loading the table on demand can take days after an import/reboot.
The prefetch might also be used to reload portions of a DDT evicted due to inactivity into the ARC.

### Pruning
Pruning cleans up old, non-duplicate (unique) records in the deduplication table (DDT) to reclaim storage and improve performance in ZFS when the DDT becomes too large.
Reclaiming available space is a prerequisite to the deduplication table (DDT) quota and pruning functions.

{{< expand "How does pruning work?" "v" >}}

> Pruning reduces the size of the dedup table (DDT) by removing unique entries, created more than a specified time ago.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pruning reduces the size of the deduplication table (DDT) by removing unique entries created more than a specified time ago.
```

Data in snapshots is fixed, and can only be changed by replicating the snapshot to a different pool with different settings (which preserves its snapshot status) or copying its contents.

It is possible to stipulate in a pool, to deduplicate only certain datasets and volumes. 
The DDT encompasses the entire pool, but only data in those locations is deduplicated when written. 
Other data that is not deduplicated well or where deduplication is inappropriate, is not be deduplicated when written, saving resources.

## Fast Deduplication on ZFS
Fast deduplication is a feature included in OpenZFS 2.3.0, that makes backend changes to legacy deduplication in ZFS that improves performance and can improve latency in some use cases.
These improvements speed up I/O processes, look-ups, and reclaim storage space, and in situations where pools are handling reasonable workloads, improve latency over legacy dedup.
Fast deduplication accomplishes these improvements through three new functions: prefetch, pruning, and a quota that limits writes to the deduplication tables (DDTs) that fall outside the specified quota range.

> Prefetch implements a cache by loading deduplication tables into the system memory (ARC).

Author: corrected in the next commit.

Loading the DDT into memory speeds up operations by reducing on-demand disk reads for every record the system processes.
Caching the DDT is particularly important in systems with large deduplication tables (DDTs) where the process of loading the table can take up to 72 hours.

> The cache of the DDT might also reload portions of a DDT flushed due to inactivity.

Author: change in the next commit.

It changes the addresses of deleted ZAP records or the markers that identify a particular data entry as already processed and as a duplicated data entry.
It identifies sibling leaf blocks by checking the first and last entries in the range corresponding to the sibling leaf.
When an entire leaf block of the ZAP object is emptied, fast deduplication collapses them into a single empty block, thereby reducing the total number of spaces in the ZAP object, but the block is not reclaimed.
It allows directories and other users of ZAP to shrink when a large number of objects are removed.
Each leaf has a single range of entries (block pointers) in the ZAP object.
If two leaves are siblings, their ranges are adjacent and contain the same number of entries.
The prefix length is the same in siblings, and the prefixes differ only by the least significant sibling bit.
ZAP shrinks by the recursive removal of empty leaves with a sibling, but both siblings must be empty.
This eliminates the need to rehash the non-empty remaining leaf.
After removing one of two empty siblings, the pointer table entries of the removed leaf point to the remaining leaf.

> The prefix of the remaining leave is decremented, has a new prefix, and might have a new sibling.

Author: Reworded and grammar fixes to the above suggestion in the next commit.

{{< /expand >}}

Quota manages the deduplication table (DDT) by keeping it from unbounded growth that can hurt RAM and performance. 
Setting a quota for the on-disk DDT effectively disables new entries for blocks if the allotted space reaches the upper limit.

> There are three quota options: Auto, Custom, and None.

Author: We document it the way it is in the UI and put it in bold font, even when there are issues with how it is said in the UI. I'll polish this content a bit more.

Auto is the default option that allows the system to determine the quota, and the size of a dedicated dedup vdev is used as the quota limit.

> This property works for both legacy and fast dedup tables.

Author: changed in the next commit

{{< expand "How does quota work?" "v" >}}
Quota uses two new pool properties, table size and quota.
Table size is the total size of all DDTs on the pool. Table quota is the maximum possible size of all DDTs in the pool.

When set, the quota checks for a new entry about to be created.
When a pool exceeds the set quota, the entry is not created and the corresponding write is converted to a regular non-dedup write.
Updating existing entries is allowed because this reuses space rather than requiring more space.

Quota options determine the behavior.
Auto sets quota based on the size of the devices backing the dedup allocation class. This makes it possible to limit the DDTs to the size of a dedup vdev only.
When the device fills, no new blocks are deduplicated. Automatic limits the size of the dedicated dedup VDEV. 
If the quota is set to zero, it translates to None.

The table quota property sets a limit (maximum size) on the on-disk size of the dedup table for a pool.
If the pool is at or over the quota limit, DDT lookups only return entries for existing blocks.
Updates are still possible but new entries are not created or added to the table.

> The DDT write stage removes the Dbit on the block and reissues the IO as a regular write. The block is not deduplicated. Note, this is based on the on-disk size of the dedup store. 

Author: removed it!

The deduplication process is very demanding! 
There are four main costs to using deduplication: large amounts of RAM, requiring fast SSDs, CPU resources, and a general performance reduction. 

> So the trade-off with deduplication is reduced server RAM/CPU/SSD performance and loss of top-end I/O speeds in exchange for saving storage size and pool expenditures.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The trade-off with deduplication is reduced server RAM/CPU/SSD performance and loss of top-end I/O speeds in exchange for saving storage size and pool expenditures.
```

{{< expand "Reduced I/O" "v" >}}
Deduplication requires almost immediate access to the DDT. In a deduplicated pool, every block potentially needs DDT access. 
The number of small I/Os can be colossal; copying a 300 GB file could require tens, perhaps hundreds of millions of 4K I/O to the DDT. 

> This is extremely punishing and slow. RAM must be large enough to store the entire DDT and any other metadata and the pool almost always is configured using fast, high-quality SSDs allocated as special vdevs for metadata. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is extremely punishing and slow. RAM must be large enough to store the entire DDT and any other metadata and the pool is commonly is configured using fast, high-quality SSDs allocated as special vdevs for metadata. 
```

{{< tabs "Hardware Symptoms" >}}
{{< tab "RAM Starvation" >}}
* **Cause**: Continuous DDT access is limiting the available RAM or RAM usage is generally very high RAM usage. 
 This can also slow memory access if the system uses swap space on disks to compensate.
* **Solutions**:
  * Install more RAM.
  * Add a new **System > Tunable**: **vfs.zfs.arc.meta_min** with **Type**=**LOADER** and **Value**=**bytes**. 

>  This specifies the minimum RAM that is reserved for metadata use and cannot be evicted from RAM when new file data is cached.

Author: removed in the next commit.

 This is often encountered with [pool scrubs]({{< relref "SCALE/SCALETutorials/DataProtection/ScrubTasksSCALE.md" >}}) and it can be necessary to pause the scrub temporarily when other tasks are a priority.
* **Diagnose**: An easily seen symptom is that console logins or prompts take several seconds to display.
 Generally, multiple entries with command <code>kernel {z_rd_int_[<i>NUMBER</i>]}</code> can be seen using the CPU capacity, and the CPU is heavily (98%+) used with almost no idle.
* **Solutions**: Changing to a higher-performance CPU can help but might have limited benefits. 40-core CPUs have been observed to struggle as much as 4- or 8-core CPUs. 
 A usual workaround is to temporarily pause scrub and other background ZFS activities that generate large amounts of hashing. 
 It can also be possible to limit I/O using tunables that control disk queues and disk I/O ceilings, but this can impact general performance and is not recommended.
{{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabs >}}

{{< expand "Hashing Note" "v" >}}
Deduplication hashes (calculates a digital signature) for the data in each block to be written to disk and checking to see if data already exists in the pool with the same hash.

> When a block exists with the same hash, the block is not written and a new pointer is written to the DDT, saving that space. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a block exists with the same hash, the block is not written and a reference count is incremented in the DDT, saving that space. 
```
